# About Coq

Coq is an interactive theorem prover, dating back to 1989, allowing us to
state, prove, and proof-check, mathematical assertions in the spirit of
[constructivism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructivism_(mathematics)),
wherein proofs are essentially functions on data in the first place; thus it is
natural to both write functions and write proofs about those functions within
one system. The logical system Coq is based on is the Calculus of Inductive
Constructions (COIC), widely considered a strong and parsimonious logical
foundation for proofs. As an added bonus, the name "Coq" is a pun on the
French word for "chicken", and the name of one its principal inventors,
Thierry COQuand, and a homonym of the C[alculus]O[f]C[onstructions], a simpler
form of the COIC.

Learn more about Coq itself from the [Coq homepage](https://coq.inria.fr/).
[Adam Chlipala's textbook](http://adam.chlipala.net/cpdt/) on Coq is a good
tutorial reference, especially when it comes to proving facts about programs
(as opposed, say, to
[pure mathematical theorems](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=52574&from=http%3A%2F%2Fresearch.microsoft.com%2Fen-us%2Fdownloads%2F5464e7b1-bd58-4f7c-bfe1-5d3b32d42e6d%2Fdefault.aspx)).

# leftpad: A Solution in Coq

This Coq solution to the leftpad challenge takes a functional-programming
approach to implementing the algorithm, and proves the correctness as a
theorem separate from the implementation.

As such it differs from an imperative-programming approach, where arrays of
characters are modified, and differs from a functional,
dependently-typed-programming approach, where the implementation's type
constrains its implementation and never compiles without meeting that
specification.

## The Functional-Programming Approach

A functional programmer, faced with a problem like this one, reaches quickly
for some *combinators* that can be used to solve the problem without any
loops, without any loop indexes, and in a more-or-less "obviously correct"
way. In this case, we implement leftpad as "calculate the correct number of
pad characters, and append them on the left." Such a solution can hardly fail
to be correct!

```coq
Definition leftpad c n (s : list char) :=
  repeat c (n - length s) ++ s.
```

However, we can't ignore "loops" forever. Some of the functions that we use in
the implementation--and in the specification--are recursive, and proving
things about them usually requires induction.

## An Opinion

Our point of view is that proving the correctness of a function like
`leftpad`, which only makes direct use of a few standard library functions,
should be "easy", if only

  * the standard library comes with enough lemmas about its functions,
  * the standard lemmas are easy for the user to find, and interoperable with
    one another, and
  * the proof-search features of the prover are strong enough.

So we honed our solution to the point where it has just one main correctness
lemma that's specific to this problem, and a few definitions that are good
candidates for inclusion in the standard library.

Early attempts showed a struggle between a lemma-base that was very general,
but made proving our theorem more difficult, and one that was well-tailored to
this problem, but full of bad candidates for standard-library inclusion.

## An Elegant Solution

We found that the most elegant balance was to devise a function, `cutn`, which
acts like a kind of inverse to `(++)`: it splits the input at a given offset,
into a prefix and suffix (using Coq standards `firstn` and `skipn`). We use it
in the specification, which reads as follows:

```coq
Lemma leftpad_correctness:
  forall padChar n s,
    length (leftpad padChar n s) = max n (length s) /\
    exists m,
      let (prefix, suffix) := cutn _ m (leftpad padChar n s) in
      allEqual _ prefix padChar /\
      suffix = s.
```

The use of `cutn` is a natural way to express the specification, which talks
about a prefix and suffix, but additionally, since it is an inverse of the top
function in our implementation `(++)`, it made proving easy.

In the end, we only need this one lemma about `cutn` (that `cutn n` is like an
inverse to `(++)`) and one lemma about the relationship of `max` to
plus/minus. Early attempts used lemmas that described slightly more
complicated interactions between `(++)` and the pair of functions, `firstn`,
`skipn`. In general, looking for inverse pairs of functions seems to be a
valuable technique.

Choosing the right lemma base for the basic functions made the proof mostly
automatic. Note that we chose not to put the `cutn_app` lemma into the `list`
hint database, and that is because it is "dangerous": applying it in the wrong
situation could lead to an unprovable goal, and hence makes proof search
harder than it has to be. We prefer hint databases that are "conservative":
whose lemmas don't guess at possibly-unprovable goals, and thus are almost
certain to be worth applying. Such is the case for the lemma `length_app`,
which says that `length (a ++ b) = length a + length b`. However, if we
included `cutn_app`, our proof script could be almost completely naive.

## Afterword

Throughout the world of machine-assisted theorem proving, it seems that the
cultivation of a very well-defined, recombinatory library of lemmas is
essential to having short proofs as well as automatable proofs. The `leftpad`
challenge was no exception.
